Record decisions for update to the repository organisation ahead of v5 (#24)
alphagov/govuk-design-system-architecture: decision-records/005-repository-organisation-for-v5.md

# Decision Record Title

> Update our repository organisation to prepare v5

Reviewer: This could also mean moving the repository itself to a new GitHub organisation. To avoid confusion, could we change it to something like:

```suggestion
Update our repository structure to prepare v5
```

<!-- The title should be a short present tense imperative phrase, less than 50
     characters, like a git commit message. -->

## Decision

<!-- An overview of the decision made. -->

To prepare our work for v5, we've agreed to make the following changes to the files in our repository and their location:

1. Move the sources (currently `src` ) and built package files (currently `package`) under the same npm package. We'll keep shipping only the built files to npm for now, excluding the source files from the package (either via `.npmignore` or using the `files` field of `package.json`)

> 2. Remove the built package files (currently `package`) from the versioning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Remove the built package files (currently `package`) from version control
```

3. Update our release process to make sure we keep checking the changes (possibly manually) between the package to be released and the previous version

> 4. Leave `dist` in its current location

Reviewer 2: Moving `dist` isn't a priority for us currently and we'd unnecessarily lose a handy diff workflow

But I'm not sure it's fair to say we've decided to leave it

Author: I'll add a "for now" to nuance as we may want to come back to that in the future (wouldn't mind removing it from version control at some point, for ex). I thought worthy to mention it to make sure the scope of the changes was clearly limited to "package" when it came to built files.

> This will yield the following structure for our repository:

Reviewer: Is it worth including the prototype kit config in the tree?

As discussed with the Prototype team on Friday, it needs to remain at the root of the npm package.

Reviewer 2: > As discussed with the Prototype team on Friday, it needs to remain at the root of the npm package.

@36degrees Don't forget if they're using `require()` or `import` with Node.js v12.19.0+ we can do:

```json
"exports": {
  ".": {
    "sass": "./govuk/all.scss",
    "import": "./govuk-esm/all.mjs",
    "require": "./govuk/all.js"
  },
  "./govuk/": "./govuk/",
  "./govuk-esm/": "./govuk-esm/",
  "./*.json": "./dist/*.json"
},
```

Where root package `*.json` imports are mapped to `dist/*.json` exports

Reviewer: Sounds sensible as a starting point. If we're not 100% sure on the approach I guess we could just list this as a thing we need to explore under 'Implications'?

Reviewer 2: Yeah course, can move it later

Might get some warnings at some point about building from `../` relative to source (Rollup, TypeScript compiler)

Author: Oh wait, to me we'd still have the source to generate the JSON file in `src` as we do now. It's the output that would end at the root of the package and not be versionned for simplicity 😄

Author: Added an implication and we can pick the implementation details in https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-frontend/issues/2639 when we update our Prototype Kit configuration.

```
govuk-frontend // The root of our repository
├── ... // Irrelevant files of folder omitted for brevity
├── dist // Not touching the location, naming might change for clarity
├── package // Naming might change for clarity

> │   ├── src // Sources are now here, versioned, not shipped to `npm`
> │   │   └── govuk // Structure inside `src` is untouched
> │   ├── dist // Built files are now here, not versioned, ships to npm

Reviewer: I think the use of 'versioned' here could be confusing (could relate to the version number of the package) so could we use another term?

```suggestion
│   ├── src // Sources are now here, tracked in version control, not shipped to `npm`
│   │   └── govuk // Structure inside `src` is untouched
│   ├── dist // Built files are now here, excluded from version control, ships to npm
```

│   │   └── govuk // Keeps creating a namespace for Nunjucks templates
│   └── package.json // Ensures dependencies of source and build are in sync

> └── pacakge.json // Workspaces configuration and top-level dependencies

Reviewer 2: 🍰

Reviewer 2: Sorry @romaricpascal this is a typo where `pacakge.json` looked like cake

```suggestion
└── package.json // Workspaces configuration and top-level dependencies
```

**Status:** accepted<!-- proposed, accepted, rejected, deprecated, superseded -->

## Rationale

<!-- The reason for the decision and any comments or disagreements cited. -->

### Regrouping source and built package files within a shared package

We may need to ship with dependencies in the future. For example:

- peer dependencies to a polyfill library if we shipped a version compiled with `import` statements for the polyfills (rather than having the polyfills bundled in)
- dependencies to other libraries, if we were shipping a Babel preset or PostCSS configuration

Moving the source and built files within the same package helps us ensure these dependencies are resolved consistently.

We don't have any dependencies yet, but moving the files would change the shape of our package and ask people to update their import paths for Nunjucks, making it a breaking change. Taking advantage of the breaking nature of the v5 release sets us up so we don't have to worry about future dependencies.

This doesn't force us to ship the source files, as well, which we've decided to exclude (at least for now). Those can be excluded via an `.npmignore` files or the `files` field in `package.json`.

> ### Removing built package files from versioning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Removing built package files from version control
```

The review app uses relative paths (`../../src/...`) to access the components of GOV.UK Frontend. While we cannot make it consume `govuk-frontend` the exact same way our users do (downloading from an `npm` registry), we can get pretty close using workspaces. Making it use `govuk-frontend` directly helps ensure that:
- we're consuming the built files, not rebuilding from source with a process that we have to keep in sync with how the package is built
- the actual files work as intended
- `entries` in `package.json` are properly configured

> - dependencies get resolved as expected

Author: Cool, I think that's something we'll just have to keep in mind if we get to setting any `peerDependencies` so we can set up tests around that 😊

> - dependencies get resolved as expected

Author: Added a note to remind us of that.

For that to happen, we need the package rebuilt regularly rather than only at the point of release. If we were to leave it in the repository, there'd be a risk of committing built files that are in-between the previous release and the next one. Remove it it ensures we can rebuilt at will.

### Updating our release process

> Versioning the built files serves as a way to check that there's no weird code sneaking in. Changes to the package get highlighted during the review of the pull request raised to commit the new build of the package and the release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Including the built files in version control serves as a way to check that there's no weird code sneaking in. Changes to the package get highlighted during the review of the pull request raised to commit the new build of the package and the release.
```

We'll need to keep checking for unexplained changes to the package as we release, even if it is by manually diffing in a first time (before further automation).

### Leaving `dist` in its current location

`dist` doesn't need to move to enable the previous points, and with the amount of changes in v5, we'll leave it out of the equation for now.

## Risks and constraints

<!-- Any accepted risks associated with the decision. -->

- There may be some confusion with `package` previously being somewhere not to edit the files of and now becoming where the sources are. Similarly, we'll have two `dist` folders (at root and in `package`). Naming might need updating to sort that out.

## Alternatives considered

<!-- Other options discussed but decided against. -->

### Regrouping source and built package files within a shared package

- Not regrouping the source and built package within the same package now. This would mean waiting for the next breaking change to do it. We may need to have peer dependencies sooner than it.

### Removing built package files from versioning

> - We could also have built the package to a separate folder that's not versioned (for ex. `govuk-frontend-local-build`) to ensure we consume the built files without impacting `package`. 

Author: @colinrotherham @36degrees Do any of you remember why we left that one aside or was it just to avoid the clunkyness of building the same thing in two places with slightly different names?

Reviewer 2: Yeah by replacing the real `govuk-frontend` in the workspace with the fake one we'd lose:

1. Dependency resolution testing
2. Package exports testing
3. Dependabot updates
4. ESLint import/export/publishing checks

Plus we'd end up replicating things in two `package.json` files

Probably more

Author: I'll update to try and reflect that 😄

Author: I was hoping the heading being under `## Alternatives considered` would clarify that it's the alternatives of `Removing built package` that are listed. It might be that `Regrouping source and built package...` only having one alternative makes things a little confusing.

- Each PR could get a package deployed to the [Github npm registry](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-npm-registry) allowing its installation by the review app down the line. This requires extra infrastructure though, and doesn't help when running locally.

> ## Implications

Author: I've put that as a risk as that's where I highlighted the risk of confusion from us treating `package` as a place we don't author the files and having two folders named `dist`.

> ## Implications

Reviewer 2: Make that three when you count `app/dist`

> # Decision Record Title

Reviewer 3: We should replace "Decision Record Title" with "Update our repository structure to prepare for v5" and remove line 3.
